[MUSIC]
So, in this lecture, we'll talk about
looping and loop control constructs.
So, looping is, basically, doing something
over and over again in your code.
Happens all the time.
There are many times you wanna go
through an array and evaluate it.
You just do whatever
the process is over and over.
Actually, in Arduino that's implicit in an
Arduino, as in whenever you're executing
you do it over and over and
over as long as the Arduino is powered on.
So, loops are an important construct, and
we'll talk about the different
ways to do loops in C.
So we've got two basic kinds of loops,
while loops and for loops.
We show three examples up here.
There's a for loop at the top,
for loop up there.
Then there's two while loops.
There's a while loop on the left, a
regular while loop, and then on the right,
there's a do while loop.
It's got a do at the top and
a while at the bottom.
So generally with any kind of loop,
regardless of what kind of loop there is,
there's always gonna be some
kind of an initialization step.
Okay?
And some kind of increment step and
some kind of a conditional check.
So, every loop has to
have some end condition.
Some kind of condition that notes,
that tells you that the loop is done.
Right?
So
you never,
you usually don't wanna loop forever.
Actually in Arduino's you do, but
we'll get to that next course.
But often you don't wanna loop forever.
Maybe you only wanted to do
this thing 100 times, right?
So, you need to be able to check,
have I done this 100 times?
All right, so there's always gonna
be some sort of a conditional check
associated with a loop.
Where you check has this
been done a hundred times.
Now the most common way to
check a thing like that is,
say you got a variable,
you have some variable
which just tells you how many times
you've been through the loop.
So, like I is a typical name for
that variable, I for index.
So say you wanna go through
a loop a hundred times.
At the beginning of the loop
you'll set that I equal to zero.
Then every time you go through the loop
I say I plus plus, incrementing I.
Then every pass of the loop before you
start the loop again you want to check,
is I still less than a hundred.
If I is less that a hundred,
then you do the loop again.
But eventually I isn't less than a hundred
and you're through with the loop.
Okay?
And
that's what's gonna happen if it's a for
loop or a while loop, either one,
basically that's gonna happen, right?
There's some kind of a check for the end,
for the termination condition, okay?
Now and often that's just using an index
variable and adding one to it every time
but you can have much more sophisticated
conditional checks at the end, for
termination, if you want to.
So, now the conditional check at a for
loop and
at a regular while group the conditional
check is checked at the beginning, right,
to see if you're done with it.
Where, so if you look in a for
loop expression two, expr2,
that is actually the conditional check,
right?
And I'll give you an example of that,
but that's a conditional check and
you do it at the top of the loop.
The while loop, the first while loop
on the right, expression two, again,
is a conditional check.
If that condition is true,
then you execute the loop.
If it's false,
you skip the loop and you're done.
Now in the one on the right, expression
two again is a conditional check, but
notice that it's at
the bottom of the loop.
So what that means, the difference with
that while loop on the right is that
It executes it always goes
through the loop at least once.
Because it doesn't do a check until
the end of the first pass of the loop.
So just between those two while loops, is
just where you do the conditional check.
Do you do it at the end
of an iterational loop or
at the beginning of an iterational loop?
And the difference happens with
the one where you check at the end,
means you always have to go
through the loop at least once.
Where with the one that you
check at the beginning,
you might not go through it the first
time if the condition isn't true.
So let's take this while loop.
There's a main statement, a main function.
First, before we even
get into the while loop,
you first define a variable called i and
set it equal to zero.
So I is gonna be our index variable and
that's gonna tell us how many
times we've been through the loop.
This is a very common thing
to do in these loops.
Now, you notice the while.
In parentheses,
it says while i less than 3.
So, what this is gonna do is
execute this while loop 3 times.
So i starts off at 0.
And then, inside the loop, you'll see,
it does a print statement, a print f.
It prints the variable i.
And then it says, i equals i plus 1.
So every pass of this
loop i is incremented.
So the first time through
the loop i is equal to zero.
The next time through the loop
is i is equal to one.
Next time through is equal to two.
And then it becomes three.
So then you get back to the top and
it says while i less than three but
if i is equal to 3 then that's not true so
it finishes the loop at that point.
So this loop will actually
execute three times.
When i is equal to zero,
i is equal to one, and i is equal to two.
Once i is equal to 3, it exits the while
loop and it doesn't execute a final time.
So, this while loop, after the word while,
in parenthesis you have
the termination condition.
Right?
The condition that is checked at
the beginning of every
pass through the loop.
Now, a for
statement actually it's a little more
structured than a while statement, right?
Now, you notice how the while loop,
it had the termination
condition in the parenthesis.
So, the for loop,
if you look at its parenthesis,
the parenthesis after the for, so for
and then it's open paren, close paren.
There are actually three statements
in there separated by semicolons.
Now the middle statement is
the termination condition just like
with the Y loop.
I less than three.
The first statement is
the initialization condition.
So that tells you what you want to
do just right at the beginning,
the first time you start this loop.
I equals zero, assigning I equal to zero.
Now notice with the Y loop.
That wasn't built into the while loop.
So we had a statement before the while
loop that said i equal to zero.
But with the for
loop that's built right into the for loop.
The first statement inside
the parentheses is the initialization.
Then you've got the termination,
the second statement.
And the third statement is the step,
the increment.
So i plus plus.
So what that does is that third statement
is executed at the end of every loop.
So every time you execute the loop
it automatically does i plus plus
incrementing it.
Now notice in the while loop
it also incremented but
we had to make it explicit.
We as a programmer,
we had to write i equals i plus one
as a statement inside the loop.
With the for
loop you don't have to do that.
It's just built into
the structure of the for
loop, that i++, that last step at the end.
So this loop right here does
the same thing that the while loop
did on the last slide.
It just does it with a for loop instead.
And notice that the initialization,
the termination of the step,
they're all built into the for loop.
Unlike with the while loop, where the
termination was built into the while loop
but the initialization step had to
be put in manually by the program.
One other thing about break and continue.
So actually we looked at break already, in
the context of the switch statement, but
break is also used in loops.
It does a similar thing inside a loop and
also there's a continue statement.
So let's look at break first.
What a break does is it
just exits the loop.
So if you ever execute a break,
it jumps out of the loop.
So if we look at our while loop
at the top, the first one.
While (x > 5)  and
if (y < 3) then it breaks.
So even though you might
not be done with the loop.
Maybe x is still this is sort of a messed
up loop but ignoring the content
of the loop let's say this loop we
wanna go through this loop 100 times.
X is gonna be greater than
five a hundred times, right?
But it doesn't matter.
Cuz if you hit that break statement,
if y is less than 3 and
you hit that break, then you jump
out of the while loop regardless.
And it kicks you out and
so you don't execute,
it sort of pre-amps the termination
check it says like a early termination,
it's what a break is, in terms of a loop.
Now continue is a little bit different,
continue when you hit the continue
it doesn't jump out of the entire loop
it jumps out of that one iteration and
moves to the next iteration.
So, in the example we have below,
we replace the break with a continue.
So what happens is if that continue is
executed, it doesn't jump out of the loop,
it goes to the top of the loop.
So what that effectively does,
in this case is,everything in the loop
after that continue is not
executed on that path.
So in this loop, you see there is
an x++ after the continue, right?
On the path where you execute continue,
that x++ is skipped right?
And the loop goes back to the beginning,
right?
So it stays inside the look it just goes
to the next iteration of the loop and
skips whatever the remainder
of the loop is.
Thank you.
[MUSIC]